The Project Gutenberg eBook of Identifying Hardwoods Growing on Pine Sites,
by Clair A. Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Identifying Hardwoods Growing on Pine Sites
       Forest Service General Technical Report SO-15

Author: Clair A. Brown
        Harold E. Grelen

Release Date: August 8, 2021 [eBook #66012]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IDENTIFYING HARDWOODS GROWING ON
PINE SITES ***




                             Clair A. Brown
                            Harold E. Grelen




              IDENTIFYING HARDWOODS GROWING ON PINE SITES


                   Southern Forest Experiment Station
                    U.S. Department of Agriculture,
                             Forest Service
                     General Technical Report SO-15




                            Acknowledgments


The authors thank Bryan A. Jowers, Glendale, California, for the
excellent winter silhouettes. For help in obtaining specimens or
photographs of species not easily accessible to us, we thank the
following: Roger W. Barbour, University of Kentucky; William Harlow,
College of Environmental Science and Forestry, State University of New
York; Richard Johnson, Caroline Dormon Nature Preserve; Betty E. Lemon,
University of Southwestern Louisiana; R. Dale Thomas, Northeast
Louisiana University; and Lino Della-Bianca and Edwin R. Lawson of the
U.S. Forest Service.




                                Summary


This publication illustrates and describes 26 hardwood species or
varieties, including 16 oaks and hickories, with photographs of leaves,
bark, buds, flowers, and fruits. Line drawings feature the winter
silhouette of each species and a key is included to assist in
identification.




                     US. Department of Agriculture
             Forest Service General Technical Report SO-15




              Identifying Hardwoods Growing On Pine Sites


                            _CLAIR A. BROWN_
                          Professor Emeritus,
                          Department of Botany
                       Louisiana State University
                         Baton Rouge, Louisiana

                           _HAROLD E. GRELEN_
                       Principal Range Scientist
                   Southern Forest Experiment Station
                          Forest Service—USDA
                          Pineville, Louisiana


                                  1977

 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
                     Office, Washington, D.C. 20402




                                Contents


                                                                    Page
  Overview of Southern Hardwoods                                       1
  Key to Hardwoods                                                     6
  Species Described and Illustrated
      Mockernut hickory                                               10
      Pignut hickory                                                  12
      Shagbark hickory                                                14
      Bitternut hickory                                               16
      Southern red oak                                                18
      Cherrybark oak                                                  20
      Black oak                                                       22
      Scarlet oak                                                     24
      Northern red oak                                                26
      Shumard oak                                                     28
      Blackjack oak                                                   30
      Laurel oak                                                      32
      Water oak                                                       34
      White oak                                                       36
      Post oak                                                        38
      Chestnut oak                                                    40
      Winged elm                                                      42
      American elm                                                    44
      Sugarberry                                                      46
      Yellow-poplar                                                   48
      Sweetbay                                                        50
      Sweetgum                                                        52
      Red maple                                                       54
      Black tupelo                                                    56
      White ash                                                       58
      Green ash                                                       60
  Selected References                                                 63
  Glossary                                                            65
  Index                                                               69




                     Overview of Southern Hardwoods


Throughout the South some 49 billion cubic feet of small, low-quality
hardwoods are growing on southern pine sites[1] (Staff, For. Resour.
Res. Work Unit 1976). This material is usually wasted; if the site is
prepared for regeneration to pine, the hardwoods there are destroyed.
Research is underway to find economical methods of harvesting and
utilizing these hardwoods. The descriptions, key, and illustrations in
this book should help wood utilization researchers, especially those new
to the South, to identify the most prevalent hardwood species on
southern pine sites (Table 1).


Table 1.—_Important hardwoods on southern pine sites, ranked according
to percentage of total hardwood volume_

  Percentages were derived from Staff, For. Resour. Res. Work Unit
  (1976).

  Nomenclature used herein follows Little (1953).

                           _Species_                           _Percent_

  Sweetgum         _Liquidambar styraciflua_ L.                     13.2
  White oak        _Quercus alba_ L.                                12.3
  Hickory          _Carya_ spp.                                      8.5
  Southern red oak _Quercus falcata_ Michx.                          8.1
  Post oak         _Quercus stellata_ Wangenh.                       7.0
  Yellow-poplar    _Liriodendron tulipifera_ L.                      7.0
  Black tupelo     _Nyssa sylvatica_ Marsh.                          5.5
  Water oak        _Quercus nigra_ L.                                4.7
  Black oak        _Quercus velutina_ Lam.                           4.0
  Scarlet oak      _Quercus coccinea_ Muenchh.                       3.6
  Red maple        _Acer rubrum_ L.                                  3.6
  Chestnut oak     _Quercus prinus_ L.                               2.9
  Northern red oak _Quercus rubra_ L.                                2.4
  Laurel oak       _Quercus laurifolia_ Michx.                       1.4
  Elm              _Ulmus_ spp.                                      1.4
  Cherrybark oak   _Quercus falcata_ var. _pagodaefolia_ Ell.        1.2
  Ash              _Fraxinus_ spp.                                    .9
  Sweetbay         _Magnolia virginiana_ L.                           .6
  Shumard oak      _Quercus shumardii_ Buckl.                         .2
  Hackberry        _Celtis_ spp.                                      .1
  Other hardwoods  including blackjack oak (_Quercus                11.4
                   marilandica_ Muenchh.)
  Total hardwoods                                                  100.0


Hickories have alternate compound leaves with 5 to 13 leaflets. They are
monoecious; that is, the stamens and pistil are borne in separate
flowers on the same plant. Flowers generally develop after the leaves
are three-fourths to full grown. Staminate flowers are in catkins, which
occur on last year’s wood and usually have three branches. The stalkless
pistillate flowers are in several-flowered spikes at the apex of the
current season’s growth. Catkins last from 10 days to 3 weeks and are
usually not useful in distinguishing the species. The fruit, however, is
widely used for identification. The husk may be very thin (about 1 mm),
moderately thick (3 to 5 mm), or very thick (more than 5 mm). Similarly,
the shell may be thin, moderately thick, or very thick. The meat varies
from sweet to bitter. Upon drying, the husk usually separates along
sutures and frees the nut. In some species the husk partly splits at the
sutures but still encloses the nut when it falls. Such nuts are usually
sterile, because the meat is seldom filled out.

For identification purposes use nuts from the ground with caution; if
more than one species grows in the vicinity, the fruits could be mixed.
Also some trees shed defective or sterile fruits early, and these fruits
are often different in shape and size from typical fruit.

Hickories are generally divided into true hickories, which have
overlapping (imbricate) bud scales, and pecan hickories, which have
valvate bud scales. True hickories are divided into those with tight
bark and those with loose bark. Mockernut Hickory, _Carya tomentosa_
Nutt., a tight bark species, has very pubescent leaves, large buds, and
a thick husk over a large nut. Pignut Hickory, _C. glabra_ (Mill.)
Sweet, also a tight bark hickory, has three to nine glabrous leaflets
and a tardily dehiscing husk about 3 mm thick. Shagbark Hickory, _C.
ovata_ (Mill.) K. Koch, is one of the few species with bark in thin,
loose plates. It has small buds and usually has five leaflets. Bitternut
Hickory, _C. cordiformis_ (Wangenh.) K. Koch, belongs to the pecan
hickory group and has yellow buds with valvate scales. It also has tight
bark, thin four-winged husks, thin shells, and bitter meat.

Oaks are also monoecious, and staminate flowers are in drooping catkins,
which consist of a central, flexible axis with sessile, apetalous and
pubescent flowers. They are most abundant on the developing new twigs.
Although catkins vary among oaks, they are usually not used as
distinguishing characteristics because they last only 2 to 3 weeks.
Pistillate flowers occur on wood of the previous season and in leaf
axils of twigs. In red oaks, however, pistillate flowers on current
twigs do not mature until the second fall.

The fruit, a nut or acorn, consists of the seed enclosed in a shell. The
nut is seated in a cup consisting of many scales. At maturity nuts are
shed from the tree by shrinkage of the cup (dehydration). Considerable
variation in mature acorn size occurs among trees of a species, notably
in water oak, willow oak, and white oak.

Differences in foliage within a species also complicate identification.
Apparently because lower leaves receive less sunlight they differ in
size and appearance from those in the middle or upper crown. Most
taxonomists prefer a specimen from the upper half of the crown because
they consider leaves from this area typical for the species. To get such
specimens easily, use a tree pruner and take leaves from at least 20 to
30 feet off the ground or collect them from freshly felled trees.
Moreover, foliage of seedlings and small saplings often differs from
that of mature trees, and spring and summer growth flushes on the same
branch often appear markedly different. This seasonal variation has been
noted for many oaks, including laurel, post, blackjack, and especially
water oak. For example, by late March or April, water oak leaves reach
their normal size and shape—obovate with a wavy apex; the second flush
of growth, which starts in late April or May, produces lobed leaves.

Identification is further complicated because hybrids commonly occur
among the oaks.

The oaks are divided into two main groups: the white oaks and the red
(or black) oaks. The white oaks have leaves with rounded lobes and no
bristles; acorns mature the first fall, and the inner surface of the
shell is glabrous. White oak, chestnut oak, and post oak belong to this
group. The red oak group is characterized by bristle-tipped leaf lobes
in such species as Shumard, southern red, northern red, cherrybark, and
black oak. The red oak group also includes non-lobed species such as
water, laurel, and willow oak, which usually have entire margins.
Blackjack oak leaves usually lack lobes and bristles, but leaves with
terminal lobes occasionally occur and may have one bristle per lobe.
Acorns mature the second fall, and the inner surface of the shell is
pubescent.

Southern Red Oak, _Quercus falcata_ Michx., and its variety Cherrybark
Oak, _Q. falcata_ var. _pagodaefolia_ Ell., have almost identical
acorns, but they can be distinguished by other characteristics. The leaf
base of southern red oak is somewhat bell-shaped, but that of cherrybark
is not. Southern red oak forms heavy ridges of bark; cherrybark does
not.

The distinctive feature of Black Oak, _Q. velutina_ Lam., is its
yellow-orange inner bark. Its leaves take three forms. Seedlings to
small saplings have a “bear-paw” leaf with only a suggestion of lobing.
Lower leaves on large trees also have little lobing, but leaves from the
middle and upper crown are clearly lobed. The uppermost leaves, which
have seven lobes and deep sinuses, are usually illustrated as typical.

Scarlet, _Q. coccinea_ Muenchh., Northern Red, _Q. rubra_ L., and
Shumard Oak, _Q. shumardii_ Buckl., are difficult to distinguish.
Northern red oak leaves have shallow sinuses and a dull-green upper
surface with little or no pubescence in the vein axils on the underside.
Shumard oak leaves have a glossier surface, shallow to deep sinuses that
are usually wider than the adjacent lobes, and definite hairiness at the
vein axils. The sinuses of scarlet oak are also usually wider than their
adjacent lobes, which are usually toothed. Both Shumard and scarlet oak
have outstanding fall coloration.

Blackjack Oak, _Q. marilandica_ Muenchh., can be recognized by its
leathery, usually entire, broadly obovate leaf, which has a rusty
undersurface. The branches are stout, irregular, gnarled, drooping to
horizontal.

Laurel Oak, _Q. laurifolia_ Michx., and Water Oak, _Q. nigra_ L., are
similar in size and shape, but water oak has oblong-obovate or
spatula-shaped leaves gradually narrowed to a wedge-shaped base. Laurel
oak leaves are elliptic to oblong-ovate. Laurel oaks tend to shed leaves
late and thus may retain about 30 to 50 percent of their lower leaves
after water oaks are bare. Some recent authors separate the laurel oaks
into two species, upland laurel oak, _Q. hemisphaerica_ Bartr., and
swamp laurel oak, _Q. laurifolia_ Michx.

White Oak, _Q. alba_ L., has a thin, light green leaf with a light
glaucous bloom at maturity; it is oblong or ovate, with rounded lobes
and three to five narrow sinuses extending nearly to the mid-rib. The
cup scales of the acorn-cup are heavy and distinct.

Post Oak, _Q. stellata_ Wangenh., has stout, irregular branches. The
leathery leaves are usually five-lobed; usually the two side lobes are
at right angles to the central axis, thus forming a cross-shaped leaf.

Chestnut Oak, _Q. prinus_ L., resembles swamp chestnut oak, _Q.
michauxii_ Nutt., a commercially important tree southwide. Chestnut oak
is primarily a northeastern tree, extending into the South along the
Appalachian highlands into northern Georgia and Alabama where its range
overlaps that of swamp chestnut oak, and its leaves lack the dense
pubescence found on those of swamp chestnut oak.

Common elms include American Elm, _Ulmus americana_ L., and Winged Elm,
_U. alata_ Michx. Both bloom after a freeze breaks dormancy. For
example, if a killing frost occurs in the last week of November or the
first week of December, American elm will bloom the first week of
January. If no killing frost occurs by early December. American elm may
not bloom until the third week of January. Winged elm usually blooms 10
days to 2 weeks later than American elm. Small winged elm trees
frequently have a corky outgrowth on opposite sides of twigs at least 3
years old. Mature trees often lack this characteristic. The American elm
leaf has unequal basal lobing and pubescent or ciliate samaras about 12
mm in diameter; winged elm has a smaller leaf with round to acute leaf
bases and a very ciliate samara about 8 mm long.

Young Sugarberry, _Celtis laevigata_ Willd., and Hackberry, _C.
occidentalis_ L., trees are readily recognized by a whitish to light
gray bark dotted with small corky warts. Older trees often have
relatively smooth, light to medium gray bark. Leaf margins of sugarberry
are usually entire or indistinctly toothed; the upper half of hackberry
leaves are usually conspicuously serrate. Both species produce tiny
flowers on the new growth when the leaves are about half normal size.
The fruit of sugarberry is orange-red to black; that of hackberry is
dark red to nearly black at maturity.

Yellow-poplar, _Liriodendron tulipifera_ L., or tulip tree, has
alternate, four- to six-lobed leaves with truncate to distinctly notched
apices, a unique feature among American trees. The flowers are
tulip-like with red markings on a greenish-yellow background. The fruit
is a cone-like aggregate of samaras.

Sweetbay, _Magnolia virginiana_ L., produces moderate-sized trunks on
uplands or numerous pole-like suckers in branch bottoms. It is evergreen
in the southern part of its range and deciduous in the northern portion.
A wind blowing in the crown will expose the silvery underside of the
leaves. The white flowers, about 5 to 10 cm in diameter, open for the
first time about 3 p.m. and close about 9 p.m. They reopen the next
morning and shed their stamens. The fruit is a green pickle-like
aggregate of follicles that splits open to reveal red seeds. Sweetbay
and yellow-poplar, both members of the Magnolia family, have stipule
scars circling the twigs.

Sweetgum, _Liquidambar styraciflua_ L., or redgum, is easily recognized
by its alternate, star-shaped, palmately lobed leaves. Some trees have
corky outgrowths on the small branches. Its flower consists of several
round clusters of stamens arranged in a raceme and a stalked pistillate
head that develops into a spiny, woody fruit containing many seeds.

Red Maple, _Acer rubrum_ L., has simple, opposite leaves that are
usually glaucous and pubescent. The flowers appear in early February and
the fruit is a double samara. The variety _A. rubrum_ var. _drummondii_
(Hook. and Arn.) Sarg., which has densely matted white hairs on the
undersides of young leaves, grows in swamps throughout the South. Leaves
may have three to five lobes, but southern trees are predominantly
three-lobed. For this reason, some authors recognize the southern form
as _A. rubrum_ var. _tridens_ Woods.

The leaves of Black Tupelo (blackgum) _Nyssa sylvatica_ Marsh., are
alternate, elliptical to obovate, and become spotted early in their
development, turning purplish in September before their early shedding.
The flowers are small, inconspicuous, and produce a blue-black fruit.

Two of the most common ashes are White Ash, _Fraxinus americana_ L., and
Green Ash, _F. pennsylvanica_ Marsh. The most reliable distinction
between the two species appears to be samara differences. White ash has
a plump, short seed end with the wing practically terminal, whereas
green ash has a slender seed end and the wing extends more than halfway
down the seed end. White ash usually has a rounded leaflet base, but
green ash has wedge-shaped leaflet bases. The undersurfaces of fresh
white ash leaves are white, but the color is difficult to detect on dry
specimens. Green ash leaves are green on both surfaces, although
somewhat paler on undersurfaces.




                            Key To Hardwoods


The key is composed of paired statements, one true and one false for any
given specimen. The guide numbers at the end of statements are used to
locate the next pair. Follow the true statements until you come to a
common name. If you have made no mistake in interpreting the paired
statements, you should arrive at the correct identity of the specimen.
Then check the text and illustration.

  1. Leaves compound, with blades divided into leaflets                2
  1. Leaves simple, blades not divided into leaflets                   7
    2. Leaves with opposite arrangement on twigs                       3
    2. Leaves with alternate arrangement on twigs                      4
  3. Leaflets with rounded bases, conspicuously whitish below when
      fresh; seed end of samara thickened, wing terminal only  White Ash
  3. Leaflets with wedge-shaped bases, green below; wing terminal and
      extending about half the length of the seed              Green Ash
    4. Buds valvate; buds, fruits, and lower surface of leaflets covered
        with yellow glandular scales; fruit winged on upper half of husk
        suture, husk thin, shell thin, meat bitter     Bitternut Hickory
    4. Buds imbricate, composed of overlapping scales                  5
  5. Leaflets typically 5, glabrous except for a few hairs on rachis and
      midribs; bark shaggy                              Shagbark Hickory
  5. Leaflets 7                                                        6
    6. Leaflets densely tomentose; bark tight, in diamond-shaped
        pattern; husk very thick, shell thick, meat sweet
                                                       Mockernut Hickory
    6. Leaflets usually glabrous; bark tight, in diamond-shaped pattern;
        husk moderately thick, shell thick, meat sweet, husk tardily
        dehiscent                                         Pignut Hickory
  7. Leaves essentially evergreen, large percentage staying on trees
      until bud expansion, dark green above, silky white pubescent
      below; flowers white, about 5 to 8 cm in diameter         Sweetbay
  7. Leaves typically deciduous, or trees retaining some dead leaves to
      bud expansion                                                    8
    8. Leaf margins entire                                             9
    8. Leaf margins lobed or toothed                                  12
  9. Leaves with rusty pubescence below, broadly obovate, leathery bases
      tapering to cordate or cuneate                       Blackjack Oak
  9. Leaves essentially glabrous or with a few hairs in vein axils    10
    10. Leaves shiny below, elliptic or rhombic to spatulate  Laurel Oak
    10. Leaves dull green below                                       11
  11. Leaves elliptic to obovate, strongly veined with purple spots and
      discoloration in summer; fruit a drupe                Black Tupelo
  11. Leaves abruptly obovate, bases wedge-shaped, few lateral veins;
      fruit an acorn                                           Water Oak
    12. Leaf margins toothed                                          13
    12. Leaf margins lobed                                            16
  13. Margins indistinctly toothed, blades narrowly to broadly ovate,
      base unequal, apex long acuminate                       Sugarberry
  13. Margins distinctly toothed                                      14
    14. Teeth obtuse or rounded, leaf base wedge-shaped, stellate
        pubescent below                                     Chestnut Oak
    14. Teeth sharp                                                   15
  15. Leaves normally elliptic, veins prominent below, bases rounded;
      corky outgrowths on older branches, often lacking on large trees
                                                              Winged Elm
  15. Leaves broadly oval, pinnate veins distinct, margins doubly
      toothed, bases oblique, unequally rounded             American Elm
    16. Leaves palmately lobed                                        17
    16. Leaves pinnately or apically lobed                            18
  17. Leaves opposite, more or less glaucous and pubescent below; fruit
      a double samara                                          Red Maple
  17. Leaves alternate, glabrous below; fruit spherical, woody with
      spine-like projections; corky outgrowths on branches frequent
                                                                Sweetgum
    18. Blades truncate to notched at apex, 4-lobed; fruit an aggregate
        of samaras; flower conspicuous, greenish-yellow with red
        markings                                           Yellow-poplar
    18. Blades with acute to obtuse apices                            19
  19. Blades apically 3-lobed                                         20
  19. Blades pinnately lobed                                          21
    20. Blades broadly obovate, base rounded, rusty pubescent below
                                                           Blackjack Oak
    20. Blades narrowly obovate, base wedge-shaped, mostly glabrous
                                                               Water Oak
  21. Leaves with rounded lobes                                       22
  21. Leaves with bristle tips to lobes and lateral teeth             23
    22. Leaves with 7 to 9 lobes, divided nearly to the midrib, whitish
        below                                                  White Oak
    22. Leaves with 5 unequal lobes, upper lateral pair larger,
        squarish, at right angles to midrib, crosslike in appearance,
        pubescent below                                         Post Oak
  23. Leaves pubescent below, whitish to tawny                        24
  23. Leaves glabrous below or with a few hairs on midrib and in vein
      axils                                                           26
    24. Leaves with 7 to 9 lobes, terminal lobes long, strap-shaped,
        slightly curved, bases bell-shaped              Southern Red Oak
    24. Leaves with 7 to 11 lobes                                     25
  25. Leaves oblong, 7 to 11 lobes, base broadly wedge-shaped to
      truncate, secondary lobes rare; inner bark reddish  Cherrybark Oak
  25. Leaves broadly oval, 7 to 9 lobes, each lobe with secondary
      bristle-tipped teeth; inner bark yellow-orange           Black Oak
    26. Upper leaf surface glossy green                               27
    26. Upper leaf surface dull green, 7 to 9 lobes, 8 to 22 cm long,
        round sinuses extending less than half way to midrib
                                                        Northern Red Oak
  27. Leaves with 7 to 9 narrow lobes, sinuses extending more than
      halfway to midrib                                      Scarlet Oak
  27. Leaves with 5 to 7 narrow lobes, rounded sinuses, extending about
      three-fourths of way to midrib                         Shumard Oak




                  _Species Described and Illustrated_


Mockernut Hickory
_Carya tomentosa_ Nutt.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark grayish, tight, marked with distinct diamond-shaped ridges and
furrows. Branches stout, drooping to spreading and ascending. Twigs 10
to 12 mm in diameter, conspicuous leaf scars. Buds (terminal) 10 to 15
mm long, 5 to 8 mm in diameter, scales imbricate. Leaves alternate,
deciduous, odd-pinnately compound, 20 to 40 cm long with 5 to 7 drooping
leaflets; yellow hairs and glandular hairs on lower leaflet surface,
apex acuminate, margin finely serrate, base obtuse, on very short
petiolules. Flowers unisexual, appearing in spring with developing
leaves, staminate in 3-parted drooping catkins, pistillate terminal on
new growth. Fruit subglobose to obovate, 3 to 5 cm in diameter, husk 1
cm thick, slow to open, shell of nut thick and hard, meat sweet.

    [Illustration: Mockernut Hickory/_Carya tomentosa_]


Pignut Hickory
_Carya glabra_ (Mill.) Sweet

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark light to dark gray, often blackish, rough and deeply furrowed.
Branches stout, drooping to spreading. Twigs 3 to 5 mm in diameter,
reddish brown, smooth. Buds ovoid, acute, glabrous, 8 to 12 mm long,
scales imbricate. Leaves alternate, deciduous, odd-pinnately compound,
20 to 40 cm long, usually with 7 leaflets; upper pair and terminal
largest, 10 to 15 cm long by 4 to 6 cm wide, broadly oval to slightly
obovate. Flowers unisexual, staminate in 3-branched catkins appearing
about the time of leaf maturity; pistillate terminal on new growth.
Fruit oblong to obovoid to obpyriform, 30 mm in diameter by 35 mm long,
husk about 3 mm thick, tardily dehiscent, shell of nut thick, meat
sweet.

    [Illustration: Pignut Hickory/_Carya glabra_]


Shagbark Hickory
_Carya ovata_ (Mill.) K. Koch

Bark smooth at first, then breaking into long, flat, irregular gray
strips, to 5 mm thick, usually attached at the apex, free at the base.
Branches stout, smooth, spreading to ascending. Twigs stout,
orange-brown, leaf scars large. Buds (terminal), 10 to 20 mm long, 6 to
8 mm in diameter, scales imbricate. Leaves alternate, deciduous,
odd-pinnately compound with 5 to 7 leaflets, usually 5 to 18 cm wide and
20 to 35 cm long; lateral leaflets ovate to ovate-lanceolate, terminal
leaflet usually obovate, apices acute to acuminate, margins finely
serrate, bases wedge-shaped, more or less yellow, pubescent below,
gradually becoming glabrous with age. Flowers unisexual, appearing in
spring with the developing leaves, staminate in 3-lobed catkins,
pistillate on new growth. Fruits subglobose, 2.5 to 6 cm in diameter,
husk 3 to 5 mm thick, shell of nut hard and moderately thin, meat sweet.

    [Illustration: Shagbark Hickory/_Carya ovata_]


Bitternut Hickory
_Carya cordiformis_ (Wangenh.) K. Koch

Bark brown to slate gray, smooth to lightly furrowed or with strongly
interlaced ridges. Branches stiff, ascending, spreading. Twigs slender,
glossy, often with yellow glands early in the season. Buds compressed,
ovoid, 6 to 10 mm long, covered with yellow, valvate glandular scales.
Leaves alternate, deciduous, odd-pinnately compound, 15 to 25 cm long
with 7 to 9 leaflets, 7 to 15 cm long and 3 to 6 cm wide; lateral
leaflets narrowly to broadly elliptic, terminal leaflet largest and
usually obovate, apex acuminate, margin finely serrate, base
wedge-shaped, with yellow glands on undersurfaces and on rachis. Flowers
unisexual, staminate in 3-branched catkins appearing after leaves;
pistillate terminal on new growth. Fruit ovate to subglobose, 2 to 3 cm
in diameter, often slightly compressed, 4-winged on sutures from apex to
middle of husk, husk thin, covered with yellow glandular scales, shell
of nut thin, meat very bitter.

    [Illustration: Bitternut Hickory/_Carya cordiformis_]


Southern Red Oak
_Quercus falcata_ Michx.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark brown to grayish black, divided by shallow, irregular fissures
into broad ridges. Branches stout, spreading to ascending. Twigs 2 to 5
mm in diameter, dull reddish brown. Buds ovoid, angulate 8 to 13 mm
long, apex acute. Leaves alternate, deciduous, simple, many remaining as
dead foliage until spring, ovate to obovate with bell-shaped base, 10 to
28 cm long, 7 to 30 cm wide; with 3 to 9 lobes and margins with deep
rounded sinuses; when 3-lobed, central lobe strap-shaped and toothed
near the apex and side lobes acute to acuminate, somewhat falcate;
permanently pubescent below, white at first, turning rust. Flowers
unisexual, staminate in tomentose catkins as leaves unfold; pistillate
in leaf axils on twigs. Fruit an acorn, small, spherical to
hemispherical; cup 12 to 15 mm wide, shallow saucer-shaped, enclosing
about one-fourth to one-half of the nut; nut 8 to 12 mm long.

    [Illustration: Southern Red Oak/_Quercus falcata_]


Cherrybark Oak
_Quercus falcata_ var. _pagodaefolia_ Ell.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark gray to gray-black consisting of appressed scales in narrow
flat ridges with shallow furrows. Branches stout, spreading to
ascending. Twigs 2 to 4 mm in diameter, reddish, lightly fluted. Buds
ovoid, 10 to 15 mm long, angled, scales pubescent with dark margins.
Leaves alternate, tardily deciduous, persisting into December, simple,
oval to oblong, 12 to 20 cm long, 7 to 8 cm wide; with 5 to 11 lobes,
major lobes opposite each other, large rounded sinuses extending nearly
to the midrib, margin entire with occasional bristle-tipped teeth near
the apex of the lobes, dark green above, permanently pubescent below,
sometimes thinly so, varying from white to rust color, especially on
drying. Flowers as in _Q. falcata_. Fruit an acorn broader than tall;
cups 12 to 15 mm wide; nut about 8 to 10 mm long, subglobose, flattened
at base, rounded at apex.

    [Illustration: Cherrybark Oak/_Quercus falcata_ var. _pagodaefolia_]


Black Oak
_Quercus velutina_ Lam.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark brownish-black on older trees, with thick, broad scaly ridges and
deep furrows; inner bark yellow-orange—the only American oak with this
feature. Branches stout, spreading to ascending. Twigs about 5 mm in
diameter, reddish brown to dark brown, lightly fluted. Buds ovoid, 10 to
15 mm long, lateral buds sharply angled, scales ciliate, margin dark.
Leaves alternate, deciduous, simple; membranous in seedlings and
saplings to somewhat leathery in the middle to upper crown; lower leaves
broadly elliptic to obovate, 15 to 30 cm long, 10 to 15 cm wide, entire
to faintly lobed; middle-crown leaves 10 to 20 cm long, 10 to 15 cm
wide, distinctly 5 to 9 lobed with broad rounded sinuses with apical
bristles on each lobe; upper-crown leaves oblong to obovate, 8 to 20 cm
long, 8 to 15 cm wide; dark shiny green above, yellow scurfy pubescence
on young leaves of middle and upper crown, petioles 4 to 6 cm long,
yellow to reddish. Flowers unisexual; staminate catkins 7 to 15 cm long;
pistillate on short tomentose peduncles. Fruit an oval to obovoid acorn
10 to 25 mm long; cup cup-shaped to conical enclosing about one-half of
the nut.

    [Illustration: Black Oak/_Quercus velutina_]


Scarlet Oak
_Quercus coccinea_ Muenchh.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark grayish-black, divided into irregular fissures and scaly
ridges. Branches stout, spreading to ascending. Twigs 3 to 4 mm in
diameter, reddish, turning a dull red. Buds ovoid, acute, 5 to 7 mm
long, covered with rounded, lightly pubescent scales. Leaves alternate,
deciduous, simple; glabrous, except in axils of main veins on underside,
oval to slightly obovate, 8 to 17 cm long, 5 to 13 cm wide, with 5 to 9
deep lobes often terminated by secondary lobes with bristle tips,
sinuses usually deep, round, and wider than lobes; both surfaces pale
green, upper surface shiny, bright scarlet in autumn, petioles about 4
cm long. Flowers unisexual; staminate in catkins with developing leaves;
pistillate on pubescent peduncles. Fruit an acorn; cup 15 to 30 mm wide,
covered with brown scales enclosing about one-third to one-half of the
nut; nut ovoid, 10 to 20 mm long, occasionally with ring grooves near
apical point at maturity.

    [Illustration: Scarlet Oak/_Quercus coccinea_]


Northern Red Oak
_Quercus rubra_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark brown, thick, divided by shallow furrows into long,
flat-topped scaly ridges. Branches stout, spreading and ascending to
form a round-topped crown. Twigs slender, reddish-brown to dark red.
Buds ovate, acute, light brown, 8 to 10 mm long. Leaves alternate,
deciduous, simple, oblong to oval to obovate, 12 to 22 cm long, 10 to 15
cm wide; 7 to 11 short lobes, lobes 3-toothed, bristle-tipped; upper
surface dull green. Flowers unisexual; staminate in slender catkins
appearing with the developing leaves, pistillate inconspicuous on last
year’s wood. Fruit an acorn, 15 to 30 mm long; cup saucer-shaped,
enclosing about one-fourth of the nut.

    [Illustration: Northern Red Oak/_Quercus rubra_]


Shumard Oak
_Quercus shumardii_ Buckl.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark gray to blackish, relatively smooth at first, then breaking
into scaly ridges. Branches spreading to ascending. Twigs about 5 mm in
diameter, olive green then turning dark reddish. Buds clustered at apex
5 to 7 mm long, sharp pointed, strongly angled. Leaves alternate,
deciduous, simple; oval to slightly obovate, 10 to 20 cm long, 6 to 15
cm wide; with 7 to 10 bristle-tipped lobes, lobes on upper crown leaves
narrower to slightly wider than sinuses, lobes on lower crown leaves
wider than sinuses; dark green above, paler below, glabrous except for
vein axils on lower surface; petiole about 5 cm long. Flowers unisexual;
staminate in yellow catkins appearing with the unfolding leaves;
pistillate on pubescent peduncles. Fruit an acorn; cup 20 to 31 mm
across, enclosing about one-fourth of the nut; nut about 25 mm long, 15
mm in diameter.

    [Illustration: Shumard Oak/_Quercus shumardii_]


Blackjack Oak
_Quercus marilandica_ Muenchh.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark black, very rough, consisting of thick blocky plates. Branches
stout, spreading to drooping. Twigs stout, about 5 mm in diameter. Buds
with rusty brown hairs, about 4 to 8 mm long. Leaves alternate, tardily
deciduous, simple, 7 to 25 cm long, broadly obovate at apex (bear-paw
shape) tapering to a narrow base, margin entire or with 3 bristle-tipped
apical lobes, upper surface dark green, rusty pubescent on
undersurfaces. Flowers unisexual; staminate in catkins, appearing with
the leaves; pistillate solitary or paired. Fruit an acorn, cup enclosing
one-half to two-thirds of the nut; nut nearly ovoid, 20 to 25 mm long by
15 to 20 mm in diameter.

    [Illustration: Blackjack Oak/_Quercus marilandica_]


Laurel Oak
_Quercus laurifolia_ Michx.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark nearly black, divided into broad flat ridges by deep fissures.
Twigs 2 to 3 mm in diameter, usually reddish brown. Buds ovoid, reddish
brown, 2 to 4 mm long. Leaves alternate, semi-deciduous, simple, a few
shed in fall, a few persisting until spring; elliptic to spatulate, 7 to
15 cm long, 2 to 4 cm wide; apex acute or obtuse, margin entire, base
cuneate; shiny green above, paler below; petioles 3 to 5 mm long, midrib
conspicuous on underside. Flowers unisexual; staminate in catkins as
leaves unfold; pistillate on twigs at leaf scars. Fruit an acorn,
sessile to subsessile, cup 15 to 20 mm wide, enclosing about one-fourth
of nut; nut hemispheric, rounded at apex and flattened at bottom, 15 mm
long.

    [Illustration: Laurel Oak/_Quercus laurifolia_]


Water Oak
_Quercus nigra_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark smooth, grayish black, becoming scaly with age. Branches spreading
to ascending, forming a round-topped crown in the open. Twigs 3 to 5 mm
in diameter, gray. Buds ovoid, acute, reddish brown, 3 to 7 mm long.
Leaves alternate, deciduous, simple; variable in shape and size, obovate
to spatulate, 5 to 10 cm long, 2 to 5 cm wide; margin entire, wavy to
distinctly lobed in juvenile specimens; sessile or with petiole to 1 cm
long. Flowers unisexual; staminate catkins 5 to 8 cm long, pistillate
catkins short-peduncled. Fruit an acorn about 15 mm wide, 10 mm high;
cup thin, enclosing about one-fifth to one-third of the nut.

    [Illustration: Water Oak/_Quercus nigra_]


White Oak
_Quercus alba_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark light gray, separated by shallow furrows into flat ridges with
loose appressed scales. Branches stout, drooping, spreading to
ascending. Twigs 2 to 3 mm in diameter, reddish. Buds globose to ovoid,
angulate, apex acute to obtuse, 3 to 5 mm. Leaves alternate, deciduous,
simple, oblong to obovate, 7 to 20 cm long, 4 to 10 cm wide, with 7 to
11 uneven, rounded lobes and deep sinuses. Flowers unisexual, in
catkins, preceding leaf expansion. Fruit an acorn, 15 to 35 mm long, 20
to 25 mm in diameter, cup 1.5 to 3 cm wide, usually cup-shaped,
conspicuous with thickened scales, enclosing one-fourth to one-third of
the nut.

    [Illustration: White Oak/_Quercus alba_]


Post Oak
_Quercus stellata_ Wangenh.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark medium to dark gray, with deep furrows, scaly ridges. Branches
stout, irregular, drooping to horizontal and ascending. Twigs 3 to 5 mm
in diameter, gray to brownish. Buds broadly ovate, blunt to acute, 5 mm
long, clustered at apex of twig. Leaves alternate, deciduous, simple;
obovate, to 18 cm long, 5 to 10 cm wide; divided into 5 to 7 sinuate
rounded lobes, the two lower lobes smaller than the upper pair, upper
lobes and the terminal lobe resembling a cross, dark, shiny green above,
grayish to brownish below, leathery. Flowers unisexual; staminate in
catkins appearing with the unfolding leaves; pistillate on last year’s
wood. Fruit an acorn, 13 to 25 mm long, 6 to 20 mm in diameter; cup
hemispherical, enclosing about one-half of the nut, cup scales
rusty-pubescent; nut ovate to ovate-oblong, about 15 mm long.

    [Illustration: Post Oak/_Quercus stellata_]


Chestnut Oak
_Quercus prinus_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark reddish brown to nearly black, deeply furrowed with narrow
ridges. Branches stout, spreading to ascending. Twigs stout, angulate,
smooth, purplish-green when new, turning orange or reddish-brown. Buds
ovate-conical, somewhat angulate, 8 to 12 mm long, silky hairy. Leaves
alternate, deciduous, simple; elliptic to obovate, 10 to 30 cm long, 3
to 8 cm wide; somewhat leathery, margin crenate with a vein ending in
each rounded tooth, smooth green above, stellate-pubescent below.
Flowers unisexual; staminate in catkins 5 to 10 cm long; pistillate in
short spikes on stout peduncles. Fruit an acorn 25 to 35 mm long, 15 to
25 mm in diameter; cup vase-shaped, thin, rough with thickened scales,
covering one-third to one-half of the nut.

    [Illustration: Chestnut Oak/_Quercus prinus_]


Winged Elm
_Ulmus alata_ Michx.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark, smooth at first becoming deeply furrowed on larger trees.
Branches slender, ascending to spreading, corky ridges or wings on
branches 3 years or older. Twigs about 2 mm in diameter, light green
tinged with red. Buds sharp-pointed, divergent from twig 3 to 4 mm long.
Leaves alternate, deciduous, simple; broadly ovate to elliptic, 4 to 8
cm long, 2 to 4 cm wide; apex acute to short-acuminate, margin doubly to
triply serrate, base rounded; dull green above, lighter green below with
prominent pinnate veins. Flowers perfect, abundant, tiny, opening just
before leaves unfold, several in a cluster at a leaf scar, blooming late
January into February. Fruit a samara, flat and elliptic, 6 to 8 mm
long, margin ciliate.

    [Illustration: Winged Elm/_Ulmus alata_]


American Elm
_Ulmus americana_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark gray to blackish, thick, divided into flat ridges by deep furrows.
Branches ascending, arching, and spreading; open-grown trees vase-shaped
in outline. Twigs 2 to 3 mm in diameter with 5 to 7 leaves which
increase in size from basal to apical leaf, red-brown. Buds (leaf)
brown, small, scaly, acute. Leaves alternate, deciduous, simple; broadly
ovate, 5 to 15 cm long, 4 to 6 cm wide; apex acuminate, margin usually
doubly serrate, base oblique on short petiole; upper surface smooth,
marked with sunken veins pinnately arranged; veins more prominent on
underside. Flowers perfect, buds greatly enlarge before opening; with
very small flowers abundant in clusters; opening before the leaves
expand, blooming from late December into February. Fruit a samara, oval
to circular with wing surrounding the seed, about 10 mm in diameter,
margin ciliate.

    [Illustration: American Elm/_Ulmus americana_]


Sugarberry; hackberry
_Celtis laevigata_ Willd.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark light gray to almost white, thin, smooth, usually more or less
studded with irregular corky outgrowths. Branches spreading, slender.
Twigs about 3 mm in diameter, reddish-brown. Buds about 3 mm long,
alternate. Leaves alternate, deciduous, simple; narrowly elliptic to
broadly ovate, 6 to 10 cm long, 2 to 4 cm wide; apex acute, margin
usually entire, base broadly rounded or oblique. Flowers unisexual or
perfect, tiny, inconspicuous, many staminate and few pistillate
appearing on the new growth as the leaves unfold. Fruit a drupe with a
bony reticulated nutlet, about 5 mm in diameter, orange-red on a pedicel
often shorter than the petiole of the subtending leaf.

    [Illustration: Sugarberry; hackberry/_Celtis laevigata_]


Yellow-poplar
_Liriodendron tulipifera_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark thin and dark green on young trees, becoming ash-gray and
conspicuously furrowed and ridged with age. Branches spreading to
ascending, often drooping on large open-grown trees. Twigs smooth, about
5 mm in diameter, encircled by stipule scars, red-brown. Buds (terminal)
grayish green, turning red in winter, flat about 10 to 16 mm long,
scales valvate. Leaves alternate, deciduous, simple; dark green above,
turning yellow in fall; 6 to 20 cm long and as wide as long; petioles 5
to 20 cm long, often longer than the blades on low branches. Flowers
perfect, tulip-shaped, about 4 to 6 cm long, greenish-yellow with orange
to reddish markings at base of petals, color intensifies with age. Fruit
an aggregate cone, 5 to 8 cm long, gradually shattering into one-seeded,
winged samaras.

    [Illustration: Yellow-poplar/_Liriodendron tulipifera_]


Sweetbay
_Magnolia virginiana_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark gray, usually smooth, thin, in shady areas often encrusted
with mosses, liverworts, and lichens. Branches stout, spreading to
ascending. Twigs about 5 to 7 mm in diameter, encircled by stipule
scars, green. Buds (terminal), silvery gray, pubescent, 15 mm long;
smaller lateral buds often subtended by persistent petiole base. Leaves
alternate, evergreen in South, deciduous in northern part of range,
simple; elliptic to oblong, 10 to 15 cm long, 4 to 6 cm wide; margin
entire, dark green above, silvery pubescent below. Flowers perfect,
white, sweet-scented, 5 to 8 cm in diameter, appearing May to September.
Fruit an aggregate of follicles which open and shed red seeds, irregular
in shape, ovoid to ellipsoid, smooth, about 5 cm long.

    [Illustration: Sweetbay/_Magnolia virginiana_]


Sweetgum; redgum
_Liquidambar styraciflua_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark dark gray, divided by deep furrows into narrow, rounded ridges.
Branches stout, often with corky wings or outgrowths. Twigs about 4 to 6
mm in diameter, gray-brown. Buds (terminal) broadly egg-shaped, about 10
to 15 mm long, scales overlapping, slightly sticky. Leaves alternate,
deciduous, simple; palmately 5- to 7-lobed; 8 to 20 cm wide, 6 to 15 cm
long, often longer than broad; margin finely serrate; petioles 4 to 13
cm long. Flowers unisexual (plants monoecious), appearing as the leaves
unfold; staminate clustered in terminal racemes; pistillate in small
drooping spherical heads. Fruit in stalked spherical heads covered with
small spine-like projections; seed cavity at base of each spine.

    [Illustration: Sweetgum; redgum/_Liquidambar styraciflua_]


Red Maple
_Acer rubrum_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark gray, divided into scaly ridges by narrow furrows. Branches
slender, spreading and ascending. Twigs about 3 mm in diameter, reddish.
Buds spherical, reddish, clustered at apex of twig, scales with white
ciliate margins. Leaves opposite, deciduous, simple; ovate to almost
circular, 4 to 9 cm long, 2.5 to 7 cm wide, usually longer than broad;
3-lobed near the apex, margin finely serrate; dark green above, glaucous
and lightly pubescent below, pubescence usually shed. Flowers typically
polygamous, occasionally with perfect flowers, small, forming dense
clusters from separate buds before leaf expansion, conspicuous because
of the red to orange coloration. Fruit twin samaras 10 to 20 mm long.

Var. _drummondii_: Leaves larger than typical red maple, usually broader
than long; 3 to 5 lobes or occasionally scarcely lobed, margins coarsely
toothed, conspicuously glaucous below, usually permanently tomentose.
Fruit samaras 4 to 5 cm long.

    [Illustration: Red Maple/_Acer rubrum_]


Black Tupelo; blackgum
_Nyssa sylvatica_ Marsh.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark black, marked with furrows and cross-cracks that divide the ridges
into squarish plates. Branches slender, spreading to horizontal, often
drooping in open-grown specimens. Twigs 2 to 3 mm in diameter, gray to
reddish. Buds obtuse, of overlapping yellow-brown scales, terminal buds
6 mm long. Leaves alternate, early deciduous, simple; marked with
irregular black spots and purple coloration from midsummer on; elliptic
to broadly oval to obovate, 5 to 15 cm long, 3 to 8 cm wide; apex acute
to broadly rounded, margin entire, base wedge-shaped. Flowers unisexual,
less than 4 mm in diameter, appearing in April before leaf expansion.
Fruit a black drupe 8 to 10 mm long, 1 to 3 on pedicels 3 to 5 cm long,
stone faintly ribbed.

    [Illustration: Black Tupelo; blackgum/_Nyssa sylvatica_]


White Ash
_Fraxinus americana_ L.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark gray to brownish, divided into narrow, deep furrows and ridges of
equal width. Branches stout, wide-spreading. Twigs 3 to 6 mm in
diameter. Buds (terminal) broadly ovoid consisting of 4 appressed
scales, dark brown to black; lateral buds spherical, tightly appressed
to a crescent-shaped leaf scar. Leaves opposite, deciduous,
odd-pinnately compound; 20 to 30 cm long, white below when fresh;
leaflets 7 to 9, petiolulate, oval to ovate, 5 to 15 cm long, 3 to 5 cm
wide, apex acuminate, margin essentially entire, base broadly rounded,
pinnate veins conspicuous on underside. Flowers unisexual (plants
dioecious); pistillate inconspicuous about 1 mm in diameter, arranged in
dense paniculate clusters; staminate conspicuous in mass. Fruit a
samara, 25 to 60 mm long, wing terminal on the thickened seed.

    [Illustration: White Ash/_Fraxinus americana_]


Green Ash
_Fraxinus pennsylvanica_ Marsh.

    [Illustration: silhouette]

Bark brownish, smooth when young, then breaking into narrow ridges with
shallow narrow furrows. Branches drooping to spreading and ascending.
Twigs stout, 4 to 6 mm in diameter, olive green. Buds terminal black;
smaller lateral buds tightly appressed to the generally straight upper
edge of the leaf scar. Leaves opposite, deciduous, odd-pinnately
compound with 5 to 7, occasionally 9, leaflets; leaflets narrowly to
broadly elliptical, apex acuminate, margin entire to finely serrate,
base wedge-shaped, hairy below along the veins. Flowers unisexual
(plants dioecious); pistillate inconspicuous in open panicles; staminate
in compact conspicuous clusters. Fruit a samara 25 to 50 mm long, seed
end conspicuously slender and extending about half the length of the
samara, wing decurrent on seed end.

    [Illustration: Green Ash/_Fraxinus pennsylvanica_]




                          Selected References


  Bailey, L. H.
    1949. Manual of cultivated plants. Rev. ed. 1116 p. Macmillan Co.,
              New York.

  Brown, C. A.
    1945. Louisiana trees and shrubs. Bull. 1, 262 p. Louisiana Forestry
              Commission, Baton Rouge.

  Coker, W. C., and H. R. Totten.
    1945. Trees of the southeastern states. 3rd ed. 419 p. Univ. of N.
              C. Press, Chapel Hill.

  Collingwood, G. H., and W. D. Brush.
    1974. Knowing your trees. Rev. by D. Butcher. 374 p. American
              Forestry Association, Washington, D.C.

  Correll, D. C., and M. C. Johnston.
    1970. Manual of the vascular plants of Texas. Contributions from the
              Texas Research Foundation, Vol. 6. 1881 p. Texas Research
              Foundation, Renner, Texas.

  Fernald, M. L.
    1950. Gray’s Manual of Botany. 8th ed. 1632 p. American Book Co.,
              New York.

  Harlow, W. M.
    1959. Fruit key and twig key to trees and shrubs. 106 p. Dover
              Publications, New York.

  Harlow, W. M., and E. S. Harrar.
    1941. Textbook of dendrology covering the important forest trees of
              the United States and Canada. 2nd ed. 561 p. McGraw-Hill
              Book Co., New York and London.

  Harrar, E. S., and J. G. Harrar.
    1946. Guide to southern trees. 712 p. Whittlesy House, McGraw-Hill
              Book Co., New York.

  Kurz, H., and R. K. Godfrey.
    1962. Trees of northern Florida. 311 p. Univ. of Fla. Press,
              Gainesville.

  Little, E. L.
    1953. Check list of native and naturalized trees of the United
              States (including Alaska). U.S. Dep. Agric., Agric. Handb.
              No. 41. 472 p.

  Muller, C. H.
    1951. The oaks of Texas. Contributions from The Texas Research
              Foundation 1(3):21-311.

  Preston, R. J., Jr.
    1961. North American trees. 2nd ed. 395 p. Iowa State Univ. Press,
              Ames (Reprinted 1970 by M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Mass.).

  Sargent, C. S.
    1922. Manual of the trees of North America (exclusive of Mexico).
              2nd ed. 910 p. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston and New York.
              (Reprinted by Dover Publications, New York).

  Small, J. K.
    1933. Manual of southeastern flora. 1554 p. Published by author in
              New York.

  Staff of Forest Resources Research Work Unit
    1976. Hardwood distribution on pine sites in the South. U. S. Dep.
              Agric. For. Serv. Resour. Bull. SO-59. 27 p. South. For.
              Exp. Stn., New Orleans, La.

  Vines, R. A.
    1960. Trees, shrubs, and woody vines of the southwest. 1104 p. Univ.
              of Texas Press, Austin, Texas.

  Wharton, M. E., and R. W. Barbour
    1973. Trees and shrubs of Kentucky. 582 p. Univ. Ky. Press,
              Lexington.




                                GLOSSARY


  Acuminate. Gradually tapering to a pointed apex.
  Acute. Having the shape of an acute angle.
  Aggregate. A cluster of ripened ovaries traceable to separate pistils
              of the same flower and inserted on a common receptacle.
  Anther. The pollen-bearing portion of the stamen.
  Anthesis. Time of flowering.
  Apetalous. Without petals.
  Apex. The tip of leaf, twig, or other plant part.
  Apical. Pertaining to apex.
  Ascending. Growing obliquely or indirectly upward from point of
              attachment.
  Axil. Upper angle between a leaf or other plant part and the stem to
              which it is attached.
  Bisexual. Having both sex organs on the same plant; a hermaphrodite.
  Blade. The flat expanded portion of a leaf or parts of a compound
              leaf.
  Catkin. A flexible, usually pendulous, scaly spike bearing unisexual
              flowers.
  Ciliate. Having a margin fringed with hair.
  Compound Leaf. A leaf with two or more separate leaflets.
  Cordate. Heart-shaped with the point at the terminal end.
  Crenate. Having a margin with rounded to blunt teeth.
  Cuneate. Wedge-shaped.
  Deciduous. Not persistent; said of leaves falling in autumn or of
              floral parts falling after anthesis.
  Dehiscent. Opening by bursting or splitting.
  Dentate. A margin with sharp teeth pointing outward.
  Dimorphous. Occurring in two forms.
  Dioecious. Unisexual, with staminate and pistillate flowers on
              separate plants.
  Drupe. A simple one-seeded fleshy fruit, the outer wall fleshy, the
              inner wall bony.
  Entire. Margins without teeth or lobes.
  Evergreen. Having green leaves throughout the year.
  Falcate. Sickle- or scythe-shaped.
  Follicle. A dry, single-carpel fruit, opening along one side for seed
              dispersal.
  Fluted. Regularly marked by alternating ridges and grooves.
  Fruit. The seed-bearing product of a plant.
  Glabrous. Smooth, devoid of hair or surface glands.
  Glandular. Furnished with glands, or glandlike.
  Glaucous. Covered with a white waxy or powdery bloom.
  Globose. Spherical, globular.
  Husk. Fleshy covering of nut in hickories.
  Imbricate. Overlapping.
  Leaflet. A single division of a compound leaf.
  Membranous. Thin, more or less flexible, translucent.
  Midrib. The central rib or central vein of a leaf or similar
              structure.
  Monoecious. Having unisexual flowers, with both sexes borne on the
              same plant.
  Nut. A hard-shelled, indehiscent, usually one-celled, one-seeded
              fruit.
  Oblique. Slanted; of unequal-sided or non-symmetrical leaves or leaf
              bases.
  Obovate. Inverted ovate.
  Obpyriform. Inverted pear-shaped.
  Obtuse. Blunt.
  Odd Pinnate. Pinnately compound with a terminal leaflet.
  Ovate. Having the lengthwise outline of an egg, broadest at the base.
  Ovoid. Egg-shaped in 3-dimensions.
  Ovule. An embryonic seed in the ovary of a flower.
  Palmate. With veins or lobes radiating from a common center.
  Panicle. A compound or branched raceme.
  Paniculate. Borne in a panicle.
  Parted. Divided by sinuses which extend nearly to the midrib.
  Perfect. Having stamens and pistils in the same flower.
  Persistent. Remaining attached.
  Petiolate. Having petioles, not sessile.
  Petiole. The stalk of a leaf.
  Petiolulate. Having petiolules.
  Petiolule. The stalk of a leaflet in a compound leaf.
  Pinnate. Descriptive of compound leaves with the leaflets arranged on
              opposite sides along a common rachis. Also used to
              describe leaf venation.
  Pistil. The seed-bearing organ of the flower.
  Pistillate. Provided with pistils; usually descriptive of unisexual
              flowers.
  Polygamous. Bearing perfect and unisexual flowers on the same plant.
  Polymorphic. Having two or more forms.
  Pubescent. Covered with fine, soft, short hairs.
  Pyriform. Pear-shaped.
  Raceme. An inflorescence consisting of a central rachis bearing a
              number of flowers with stalks of nearly equal length.
  Rachis. The axis of a compound leaf or inflorescence.
  Receptacle. The portion of the floral axis upon which the flowers are
              borne.
  Reticulate. Forming a network.
  Rhombic. Somewhat diamond-shaped.
  Rib. A prominent vein.
  Samara. An indehiscent winged fruit.
  Scurfy. Covered with small scales.
  Seed. A ripened ovule.
  Serrate. With sharp teeth pointing forward.
  Sessile. Without a stalk of any kind.
  Simple. Of one piece; not compound.
  Sinuate. Deeply or strongly undulate or wavy.
  Sinus. A recess, cleft, or gap between two lobes.
  Spatulate. Spatula-shaped.
  Spike. An inflorescence consisting of a central rachis bearing a
              number of stalkless flowers.
  Stamen. Pollen-bearing organ of the flower.
  Staminate. Bearing stamens.
  Stellate. Star-shaped.
  Stipule. A leafy appendage attached to the twig at the base of a
              petiole; usually in pairs, one on each side, often
              shedding early.
  Striate. With fine grooves, ridges, or lines of color.
  Suture. Line of dehiscence.
  Subglobose. Globe shaped, but slightly flattened.
  Subsessile. Almost stalkless.
  Tomentose. Coated with short, matted woolly hair.
  Truncate. Having a blunt tip or end, appearing as if abruptly cut off
              transversely.
  Undulate. Wavy.
  Unisexual. Having stamens and pistils in separate flowers.
  Valvate. Opening by valves as in a capsule or some leaf buds; meeting
              at the edges without overlapping.
  Whorl. Circular arrangement of appendages at a node.
  Woolly. Clothed with long, matted hairs.




                               Footnotes


[1]For the purposes of this paper, pine sites are defined as forested
    uplands, excluding those growing cove-type hardwoods, that are
    supporting southern pine or show evidence, such as stumps, of its
    former occurrence.




                                 Index


                                   A
  _Acer rubrum_, 5, 54
      var. _drummondii_, 5, 54
      var. _tridens_, 5
  American elm, 4, 44
  Ash, green, 5, 60
      white, 5, 58


                                   B
  Bitternut hickory, 2, 16
  Blackgum, 5, 56
  Blackjack oak, 4, 30
  Black oak, 3, 22
  Black tupelo, 5, 56


                                   C
  _Carya cordiformis_, 2, 16
      _glabra_, 2, 12
      _ovata_, 2, 14
      _tomentosa_, 2, 10
  _Celtis laevigata_, 4, 46
      _occidentalis_, 4
  Cherrybark oak, 3, 20
  Chestnut oak, 4, 40


                                   E
  Elm, American, 4, 44
      winged, 4, 42


                                   F
  _Fraxinus americana_, 5, 58
      _pennsylvanica_, 5, 60


                                   G
  Green ash, 5, 60


                                   H
  Hackberry, 4, 46
  Hickory, bitternut, 2, 16
      mockernut, 2, 10
      pignut, 2, 12
      shagbark, 2, 14


                                   L
  Laurel oak, 4, 32
  _Liriodendron tulipifera_, 4, 48
  _Liquidambar styraciflua_, 5, 52


                                   M
  _Magnolia virginiana_, 4, 50
  Maple, red, 5, 54
  Mockernut hickory, 2, 10


                                   N
  Northern red oak, 3, 26
  _Nyssa sylvatica_, 5, 56


                                   O
  Oak, black, 3, 22
      blackjack, 4, 30
      cherrybark, 3, 20
      chestnut, 4, 40
      laurel, 4, 32
      northern red, 3, 26
      post, 4, 38
      scarlet, 3, 24
      Shumard, 3, 28
      southern red, 3, 18
      swamp chestnut, 4
      water, 4, 34
      white, 4, 36


                                   P
  Pignut hickory, 2, 12
  Post oak, 4, 38


                                   Q
  _Quercus alba_, 4, 36
      _coccinea_, 3, 24
      _falcata_, 3, 18
      _falcata_ var. _pagodaefolia_, 3, 20
      _hemisphaerica_, 4
      _laurifolia_, 4, 32
      _marilandica_, 4, 30
      _michauxii_, 4
      _nigra_, 4, 34
      _prinus_, 4, 40
      _rubra_, 3, 26
      _shumardii_, 3, 28
      _stellata_, 4, 38
      _velutina_, 3, 22


                                   R
  Redgum, 5, 52
  Red maple, 5, 54


                                   S
  Scarlet oak, 3, 24
  Shagbark hickory, 2, 14
  Shumard oak, 3, 28
  Southern red oak, 3, 18
  Sugarberry, 4, 46
  Swamp chestnut oak, 4
  Sweetbay, 5, 50
  Sweetgum, 5, 52


                                   T
  Tupelo, black, 5, 56


                                   U
  _Ulmus alata_, 4, 42
      _americana_, 4, 44


                                   W
  Water oak, 4, 34
  White ash, 5, 58
  White oak, 4, 36
  Winged elm, 4, 42


                                   Y
  Yellow-poplar, 4, 48


  Brown, C. A. and H. E. Grelen.
    1977. Identifying hardwoods growing on pine sites. USDA For. Serv.
              Gen. Tech. Rep. SO-15, 69 p. South. For. Exp. Stn., New
              Orleans, La.

This publication illustrates and describes 26 hardwood species or
varieties, including 16 oaks and hickories, with photographs of leaves,
bark, buds, flowers, and fruits. Line drawings feature the winter
silhouette of each species and a key is included to assist in
identification.


             ★U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 1978—772-231


                    U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                             FOREST SERVICE
                   SOUTHERN FOREST EXPERIMENT STATION
            T-10210 POSTAL SERVICE BUILDING. 701 LOYOLA AVE.
                      NEW ORLEANS, LOUISIANA 70113


                           OFFICIAL BUSINESS
                     PENALTY FOR PRIVATE USE, $300

                         POSTAGE AND FEES PAID
                          U. S. DEPARTMENT OF
                              AGRICULTURE
                                AGR-101

                     AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER

                              THIRD CLASS




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

—Created a Table of Contents based on the chapter headings.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IDENTIFYING HARDWOODS GROWING ON
PINE SITES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
